#summary Basic background for using a littleS3 server
#labels Phase-Deploy,Featured

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Introduction =

[http://code.google.com/p/littles3/ LittleS3] is distributed as a WAR file designed to be installed and run from a Java-based application server. This documentation uses [http://tomcat.apache.org/ Tomcat] as an example. The goal is to install littleS3 and be able to manually store objects within the application.

= Installation =

== Tomcat ==

To start, download and install [http://tomcat.apache.org/ Tomcat] as appropriate for your environment.

== Configuration files ==

[http://code.google.com/p/littles3/ LittleS3] uses two configuration files by default: `StorageEngine.properties` and `StorageEngine-servlet.xml`. These configuration files are loaded automatically from the classpath.

== Custom classpath ==

You can modify the Tomcat start up script to modify the default. For example...

In the tomcat home directory, `C:\apps\apache-tomcat-5.5.23` for instance, create a new directory named "`settings`".

Edit the `catalina.bat` file, found in the "`tomcat home directory/bin`" directory, adding:

{{{
rem Extra classpath environment stuff
set CLASSPATH=%CLASSPATH%;C:\apps\apache-tomcat-5.5.23\settings
}}}

to this section:

{{{
:noJsse
set CLASSPATH=%CLASSPATH%;%CATALINA_HOME%\bin\bootstrap.jar

rem Extra classpath environment stuff
set CLASSPATH=%CLASSPATH%;C:\apps\apache-tomcat-5.5.23\settings

if not "%CATALINA_BASE%" == "" goto gotBase
set CATALINA_BASE=%CATALINA_HOME%
:gotBase
}}}

The two configuration files `StorageEngine.properties` and `StorageEngine-servlet.xml` can now be placed in the new directory "`settings`".

== Deploy war ==

The littleS3 application is [http://code.google.com/p/littles3/downloads/list distributed] as a WAR file. The WAR packaging follows the pattern

`littleS3-[version].war`: `littleS3-2.1.0.war` for instance.

A WAR file can be deployed to a default Tomcat instance by placing the WAR file in the "`tomcat home directory/webapps`" directory. Tomcat will automatically unpack and deploy the WAR. This will make the littleS3 application available at the URL:

http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/

Where "`localhost:8080`" is the host and default port that Tomcat uses.

There are more advanced Tomcat deployment options that allow you to control the "`context path`", the "`/littleS3-2.1.0`" portion of the URL. You could deploy to a context path of "`/littleS3`", or even to the Tomcat root, so the context path would be "`/`". The context path is important when crafting the URL to access littlS3, as the [http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AmazonS3/2006-03-01/ S3 protocol] uses URL components to create buckets.

= Configuration =

There are two configuration files for littleS3: [http://littles3.googlecode.com/files/StorageEngine-servlet.xml StorageEngine-servlet.xml] and [http://littles3.googlecode.com/files/StorageEngine.properties StorageEngine.properties].

 * `StorageEngine-servlet.xml` is a Spring Framework bean wiring configuration file. This controls the component makeup of the application. You typically don't have to change the configuration values in this file.
 * `StorageEngine.properties` is a configuration file that is consumed by components configured in the `StorageEngine-servlet.xml` configuration file.

== Property Names ==

<dl>
<dt>host</dt>
<dd>May include a "token" of `$resolvedLocalHost$` to have the system "resolve" the local host value. For instance, `$resolvedLocalHost$:8080`. This would use the Java methods [http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/api/java/net/InetAddress.html#getCanonicalHostName() InetAddress.getLocalHost().getCanonicalHostName()] to determine what the local value of the hostname is. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.StorageEngine`. Example: `www.myserver.com:8080`</dd>

<dt>storageLocation</dt>
<dd>Identifies the local file system storage location that will subsequently be used for objects and metadata. This directory should already exist. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.je.JeCentral`, `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileBucketDao`, `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileS3ObjectDao`. Example: `C:/temp/StorageEngine`</dd>

<dt>dir.buckets</dt>
<dd>Identifies the directory under `storageLocation/dir.meta` that will be used to store bucket information. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileBucketDao`. Default value: `buckets`. Example: `buckets`</dd>
  
<dt>dir.db</dt>
<dd>Directory under `storageLocation` that will be used for to store the [http://www.oracle.com/database/berkeley-db/je/index.html Oracle Berkeley DB Java Edition (JE)] database based data. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.je.JeCentral`. Example: `db`</dd>

<dt>dir.meta</dt>
<dd>Identifies the directory under `storageLocation` that will be used to store meta information. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileBucketDao`, `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileS3ObjectDao`. Default value: `meta`. Example: `meta`</dd>
  
<dt>dir.objects</dt>
<dd>Identifies the directory under `storageLocation/dir.meta` that will be used to store object information. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.filesystem.FileS3ObjectDao`. Default value: `objects`. Example: `objects`</dd>
  
<dt>db.object</dt>
<dd>Directory under `storageLocation/dir.db` where the object information is stored in an [http://www.oracle.com/database/berkeley-db/je/index.html Oracle Berkeley DB Java Edition (JE)] database. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.je.JeCentral`. Example: `objectDatabase`</dd>

<dt>db.bucket</dt>
<dd>Directory under `storageLocation/dir.db` where the bucket information is stored in an [http://www.oracle.com/database/berkeley-db/je/index.html Oracle Berkeley DB Java Edition (JE)] database. Used by `com.jpeterson.littles3.dao.je.JeCentral`. Example: `bucketDatabase`</dd>
  
<dt>user.file</dt>
<dd>Sample configuration file: [http://littles3.googlecode.com/files/users.config users.config]</dd>
</dl>

= Source =

The source is divided into 4 different components: `api`, `webapp`, `filesystem` module, and `je` module. The `api` component provides the common objects used by the system. The `webapp` is the collection of the other components into a runnable system. The `filesystem` and `je` modules provide different persistent storage options. The `filesystem` module stores the persistent data using plain files in the file system. The `je` module store stores the persistent data using the [http://www.oracle.com/database/berkeley-db/je/index.html Oracle Berkeley DB Java Edition (JE)] database.

= Basic Usage =

In these samples, I have used a base URL of `http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/`. The `StorageEngine.properties` configuration parameter `host` is set to the value `localhost:8080`:

{{{
host=localhost:8080
}}}

This will allow the littleS3 system to properly parse the URL request and determine what function to perform.

== Create a bucket ==

The following REST request will create the bucket `firstBucket`.

{{{
curl --request PUT "http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/firstBucket"
}}}

Based on the other configuration parameters and using the `filesystem` module, this command will:

 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets\firstBucket`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\buckets`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\buckets\firstBucket`.
 * Create the file `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\buckets\firstBucket\firstBucket.ser`.

== Add an object ==

The following REST request will create the object `foo.html`.

{{{
curl --data "@foo.html" --request PUT --header "Content-Type: text/html" "http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/firstBucket/foo.html"
}}}

This command will:

 * Create this directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets\firstBucket\9b`. You will most likely have a different directory name; it will be two characters, but two different characters.
 * Create the file `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets\firstBucket\9b\9b8295ad7ad382ef47becac31f548902`. This file contains the actual object data.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects\firstBucket`.
 * Create the file `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects\firstBucket\keys.ser`.
 * Create the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects\firstBucket\ad`. You will most likely have a different directory name; it will be two characters, but two different characters.
 * Create the file `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects\firstBucket\ad\ad9f205559bcb9eb394e457d5b003b2a.ser`. This file stores metadata about the object.

== Retrieve an object ==

For this, you can use your browser. Open the following URL in your browser:

{{{
http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/firstBucket/foo.html
}}}

== Delete an object ==

The following REST request will delete the object `foo.html`.

{{{
curl --request DELETE "http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/firstBucket/foo.html"
}}}

 * Delete the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets\firstBucket\9b` and any files in the directory. The object contents are deleted. Since this was the only object, all of the empty directories are also removed.
 * Delete the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\objects` and any child folders and files. Since the object contents were deleted, the object metadata is removed and all of the empty directories are also removed.

== Delete a bucket ==

The following REST request will delete the object `firstBucket`.

{{{
curl --request DELETE "http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/firstBucket"
}}}

 * Delete the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\buckets\firstBucket`.
 * Delete the directory `C:\temp\StorageEngine\meta\buckets`. The `firstBucket` directory is no longer needed and being the only bucket, the `buckets` directory is removed too.

== List buckets ==

For this, you can use your browser. Open the following URL in your browser:

{{{
http://localhost:8080/littleS3-2.1.0/
}}}